PayID Easy Checkout (#1)
nkramer44/rfcs: src/spec/payid-easy-checkout.md

    RFC2818:
    RFC6265:
    RFC7231:
    RFC7413:
    RFC6570:
    RFC8446:
    PAYID-URI:
      title: "The 'payid' URI Scheme"
      target: https://tbd.example.com/
      author:
        ins: D. Fuelling
        fullname: David Fuelling
    PAYID-DISCOVERY:
      title: "PayID Discovery"
      author:
        ins: D. Fuelling
        fullname: David Fuelling

informative:
    RFC5988:

--- note_Feedback

This specification is a draft proposal, and is part of the [PayID Protocol](https://payid.org/) initiative. Feedback related to this document should be sent in the form of a Github issue at: https://github.com/payid-org/rfcs/issues.
 
--- abstract
This specification formalizes how a payment recipient, such as a merchant or a non-profit, can automatically 
initiate a payment from a payer using only the payer's PayID. 

--- middle

# Terminology

This protocol can be referred to as the `PayId Easy Checkout Protocol`. It uses the following terminology:
   
* PayID client: a client that queries a PayID server using the PayID Protocol as defined in [PAYID-PROTOCOL][].
* PayID server: the endpoint that returns payment account(s) information, which conforms to the PayID Protocol.

> * Merchant: Individual or entity receiving a payment (e.g., e-commerce merchant, charity).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Recipient: Individual or entity receiving a payment (e.g., e-commerce merchant, charity).
```

> * Payer: Individual or entity originating a payment to a `merchant`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Payer: Individual or entity originating a payment to a `recipient`.
```

* Wallet: A device or application that holds funds (may be a non-custodial wallet).
* PayID Easy Checkout URL: The URL that is the result of the PayID Easy Checkout protocol; can be used to redirect a client to a wallet corresponding to a particular PayID.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119][] and [RFC9174][].

# Introduction

> The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol is a minimal protocol that allows an online merchant to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol is a minimal protocol that allows a recipient (e.g., an online merchant or a charity) to
```

request a payment from a payer using only the payer's PayID. Implementations
of the protocol should require little to no server-side engineering efforts, while creating an improved and uniform
user experience for payers.

> The main focus of the Protocol is on PayID Easy Checkout Discovery, which defines how a PayID client can use a PayID

Reviewer: I think we could strike this whole paragraph and let the protocol do the work of saying what it does. Thoughts?

Author: My goal here was to give a brief overview of the rest of the paper, since it's the introduction section.  The actual "RFC-y" part of PayID Easy Checkout Discovery doesn't necessarily give much context or a high level view of what it is, so I figured I'd do that in the intro.  I don't think this paragraph is busying the spec or anything either, so I would be fine leaving it in.  Happy to hear pushback to that

to retrieve a PayID Easy Checkout URL which represents a resource that the payer's digital wallet can use to initiate 
a payment to the merchant. 

Though the [appendix](#appendix) of this specification provides an example usage of a 
PayID Easy Checkout URL using Web Redirects, supplemental RFCs are needed to define the different ways in which a PayID
client can utilize a PayID Easy Checkout URL.

# PayID Easy Checkout Protocol

> The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol can be used to facilitate an end-to-end checkout flow between a recipient client, such

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol can be used to facilitate an end-to-end checkout flow between a payment recipient, such
```

> as an online merchant UI, and a sending client, such as a wallet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as an online merchant, and a sending client, such as a wallet.
```

The protocol is comprised of two parts:

1. PayID Easy Checkout Discovery
2. PayID Easy Checkout URL Assembly

## PayID Easy Checkout Discovery

> PayID Easy Checkout extends [PAYID-DISCOVERY][] by defining a new link in the PayID metadata JRD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PayID Easy Checkout Discovery extends [PAYID-DISCOVERY][] by defining a new link in the PayID metadata JRD
```

returned by a PayID Discovery query. This link, defined in the [JRD section](#payid-easy-checkout-jrds) 
of this specification, includes the PayID Easy Checkout URL representing a resource on the wallet which can
be used to complete a payment.

> E-commerce merchants who wish to initiate an Easy Checkout flow MUST query the sender's PayID Discovery server to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Payment receivers who wish to initiate an Easy Checkout flow MUST query the sender's PayID Discovery server to 
```

> obtain a PayID Easy Checkout URL. Digital wallets and PayID server operators who wish to enable PayID Easy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
obtain a PayID Easy Checkout URL. PayID servers that wish to enable PayID Easy
```

Author: I guess this depends on what we define a "sender" to be.  I wanted to make a distinction between "sender" and "PayID Operator".  A "sender" alone cannot enable EZ Checkout, but a PayID server operator can.  Plus, this spec is really for PayID Servers, not the sender

Checkout MUST include a JRD Link conforming to the definition in the [JRD section](#payid-easy-checkout-jrds) of this paper 
in all PayID Easy Checkout Discovery responses.

> E-commerce merchants SHOULD implement fallback measures to complete a checkout flow if a user's wallet does not support PayID Easy Checkout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Payment receivers SHOULD implement fallback measures to complete a checkout flow if a user's wallet does not support PayID Easy Checkout.
```

Reviewer: I also wonder if we could just strike this sentence. It feels a bit misplaced, and should be obvious.

Also, line 131 seems to be repeating this instruction.

Author: Not sure if it's clear, but I tried to make it clear that EZ Checkout Discovery can fail in two places:
1. If the discovery query returns a non-200 response
2. If the discovery query returns a 200 response, but the JRD doesnt contain an EZ checkout link

I wanted to make sure that the spec suggests fallback measures in either of these cases, but maybe that's unnecessary

The following steps describe how a PayID client can query a PayID server to obtain a PayID Easy Checkout URL. 

### Step 1: Assemble PayID Easy Checkout Discovery URL
The process of assembling a PayID Discovery URL is defined in section 4.1.1 of [PAYID-DISCOVERY][], and is

> the same as for PayID Easy Checkout Discovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same as for this protocol.
```

### Step 2: Query PayID Easy Checkout Discovery URL
Querying the PayID Discovery URL is defined in section 4.1.2 of [PAYID-DISCOVERY][], and is performed

> in the same way for the PayID Easy Checkout Discovery URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the same way as this protocol.
```

Clients SHOULD implement fallback measures to complete checkout if the PayID Easy Checkout Discovery query fails.

### Step 3: Parse PayID Easy Checkout Metadata

> If a wallet supports PayID Easy Checkout, the PayID server MUST respond with a HTTP status code 200 and a JSON payload

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If PayID Easy Checkout is supported, a PayID Discovery server MUST respond with an HTTP status code `200` and a JSON payload
```

> containing a JSON Resource Descriptor (JRD) containing a link conforming to the [JRD section](#payid-easy-checkout-jrds) of this paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
containing a JSON Resource Descriptor (JRD) that contains a link conforming to the [JRD section](#payid-easy-checkout-jrds) of this document.
```

> For example, a PayID server might respond to a PayID Easy Checkout Discovery query with the following payload:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a PayID server might respond to a PayID Discovery query with the following payload:
```

     {
        "subject": "payid:alice$wallet.com",
        "links": [
            {
                "rel" : "https://payid.org/ns/payid-easy-checkout/1.0",
                "href": "https://wallet.com/checkout"
            }
        ]
     }
     

> The receiver PayID Discovery client must parse this response to find the PayID Easy Checkout Link. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PayID Discovery client MUST parse this response to find the PayID Easy Checkout Link. 
```

> If the JRD returned from the PayID Easy Checkout Discovery query does not contain a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the JRD returned from the PayID Discovery query does not contain a 
```

PayID Easy Checkout Link in its 'links' collection, PayID Easy Checkout is considered to have failed.

> Once a PayID Easy Checkout URL has been obtained from the PayID Easy Checkout Link by the PayID client, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a PayID Easy Checkout URL has been obtained from the PayID Easy Checkout Link, 
```

PayID Easy Checkout Discovery is considered to be complete. 

## PayID Easy Checkout URL Assembly

> The PayID Easy Checkout URL resulting from PayID Easy Checkout Discovery represents the resource on the wallet that can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PayID Easy Checkout URL represents the resource on a wallet that can
```

> be used to complete a payment. However, before directing a payer to their sending client, the PayID Easy Checkout client 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used by a sender to complete a payment. However, before directing a payer to their sending client, the payment receiver
```

MUST append all of the query parameters defined in the [following section](#payid-easy-checkout-url-query-parameters).

> The PayID Easy Checkout URL SHOULD be parsed by the wallet in order to retrieve any values set by the payment recipient. 

Reviewer: TODO: Move to end of line 165.

It is RECOMMENDED that wallets use these values to pre-populate a payment transaction.

> 

Reviewer: Once a PayID Easy Checkout URL is assembled, this protocol is consider to be complete.

> The PayID Easy Checkout URL SHOULD be parsed by the wallet client to retrieve the values set by the recipient client. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PayID Easy Checkout URL SHOULD be parsed by the wallet in order to retrieve any values set by the payment recipient. 
```

> It is RECOMMENDED that wallet clients use these values to pre-populate a payment transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is RECOMMENDED that wallets use these values to pre-populate a payment transaction.
```

### PayID Easy Checkout URL Query Parameters
This specification defines several query parameter names and corresponding datatypes which MUST be added to the
PayID Easy Checkout URL before redirecting a payer to their wallet client.
    
| Name           | Type             | Description                                                          |
|----------------|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| amount         | integer          | The amount that should be sent by the sender to the receiver         |

> | receiverPayID  | string           | The PayID URI of the receiver                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| receiverPayID  | string           | The (PayID URI)[PAYID-URI] of the receiver                                        |
```

> | assetCode      | string           | The ISO-4217 currency code that the sender should send               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| assetCode      | string           | The ISO-4217 currency code that denominates the amount |
```

| assetScale     | short            | Defines how many units make up one regular unit of the assetCode     |

> | paymentNetwork | string           | The payment network, as defined in [PAYID-PROTOCOL][], that the sender should send payment over. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| paymentNetwork | string           | The payment network, as defined in [PAYID-PROTOCOL][], that the sender should use to send a payment. |
```

> | nextUrl        | HTTP Url string  | A URL that the sender's wallet can use after completing the payment  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| nextUrl        | HTTP Url string  | A URL that the sender's wallet can navigate a sender to after the sender completes a payment  |
```

change the meaning of the variables specified in this document.

For example:

    Input:    alice$wallet.com
              amount=10
              receiverPayID=pay$merchant.com
              assetCode=XRP
              assetScale=6
              network=XRPL
              nextUrl=https://merchant.com/thankyou
    PayID Easy Checkout URL: https://wallet.com/checkout
    Output:   https://wallet.com/checkout?amount=100000&receiverPayId=payid%2Apay%24merchant.com&assetCode=XRP&assetScale=6&paymentNetwork=XRPL&nextUrl=https://merchant.com/thankyou

# PayID Easy Checkout JRDs
This section defines the PayID Easy Checkout Link, which conforms to section 4.4 of the
Webfinger RFC.  In order for a PayID server to enable PayID Easy Checkout, a PayID Discovery query to the server
MUST return a JRD containing a PayID Easy Checkout Link.

The Link MUST include the Link Relation Type defined in [PayID Easy Checkout URL](#iana-considerations) in the object's 'rel' field.
The Link MUST also include a PayID Easy Checkout URL in the 'href' field of the link.

    * 'rel': `https://payid.org/ns/payid-easy-checkout-uri/1.0`
    * 'href': A PayID Easy Checkout URL

> The following is an example of a PayID Easy Checkout Link that indicates a PayID Easy Checkout URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is an example of a PayID Easy Checkout Link:
```

---
coding: utf-8

title: Draft 1 - PayID Easy Checkout Protocol
docname: payid-easy-checkout-protocol
category: std

pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]
smart_quotes: off

area: security
author:
  -
    ins: N. Kramer
    name: Noah Kramer
    org: Ripple
    street: 315 Montgomery Street
    city: San Francisco
    region: CA
    code: 94104
    country: US
    phone: -----------------
    email: nkramer@ripple.com
    uri: https://www.ripple.com
  -
    ins: I. Simpson
    name: Ian Simpson
    org: Ripple
    street: 315 Montgomery Street
    city: San Francisco
    region: CA
    code: 94104
    country: US
    phone: -----------------
    email: isimpson@ripple.com
    uri: https://www.ripple.com

normative:

>     RFC2119:

Reviewer: Minor nit: these should be ordered by RFC number.

    RFC8446:
    RFC7231:
    RFC7413:
    RFC6265:
    RFC6570:
    PAYID-URI:
      title: "The 'payid' URI Scheme"
      target: https://tbd.example.com/
      author:
        ins: D. Fuelling
        fullname: David Fuelling
    PAYID-DISCOVERY:
      title: "PayID Discovery"
      author:
        ins: D. Fuelling
        fullname: David Fuelling

informative:
    RFC5988:

--- note_Feedback

This specification is a draft proposal, and is part of the [PayID Protocol](https://payid.org/) initiative. Feedback related to this document should be sent in the form of a Github issue at: https://github.com/payid-org/rfcs/issues.
 
--- abstract
This specification formalizes how a payment recipient, such as a merchant or a non-profit, can automatically 
initiate a payment from a customer using only the customer's PayID. 

--- middle

# Terminology

This protocol can be referred to as the `PayId Easy Checkout Protocol`. It uses the following terminology:
   
* PayID client: a client that queries a PayID server using the PayID Protocol as defined in [PAYID-PROTOCOL][].
* PayID server: the endpoint that returns payment account(s) information, which conforms to the PayID Protocol.

> * merchant: individual or entity receiving the payment (ie e-commerce merchant, charity).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Merchant: Individual or entity receiving a payment (e.g., e-commerce merchant, charity).
```

> * customer: individual or entity originating the payment to the `merchant`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Customer: Individual or entity originating a payment to a `merchant`.
```

> * customer: individual or entity originating the payment to the `merchant`.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should define this instead as `payer` (i.e., the one paying). "Customer" isn't quite right for a donation, and "donor" isn't quite right for a purchase of goods/services.

Author: Agreed. I'll rename

> * wallet: the holder of funds for the `sender` (may or may not be custodied).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wallet: A device or application that holds funds (may be a non-custodial wallet).
```

> * Redirect URL: The URL that is the result of the PayID Easy Checkout protocol, and which can be used to redirect a client to a wallet corresponding to a particular PayID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Redirect URL: The URL that is the result of the PayID Easy Checkout protocol; can be used to redirect a client to a wallet corresponding to a particular PayID.
```

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119][] and [RFC9174][].

# Introduction

> The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol is a minimal protocol designed to provide a standard method for online merchants to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol is a minimal protocol that allows an online merchant to
```

request a payment from a customer using only the customer's PayID. Implementations

> of the protocol should require little to no server-side engineering efforts, while creating an improved and uniform

Reviewer: Consider inverting the benefit here, like this?

```
This protocol will help create a uniform user experience for customers with minimal technical effort from both wallets and merchants.
```

user experience for customers.

> The main focus of the Protocol is on PayID Easy Checkout Discovery, which defines how a PayID client can use a PayID

Reviewer: TODO: Reword for template removal.

to retrieve a PayID Easy Checkout URI Template which, when expanded, constitutes a PayID Easy Checkout URL 
representing a resource that the customer's digital wallet can use to initiate a payment to the merchant. 

> Though section (TODO: link to appendix example usage section) of this specification provides an example usage of a 

Reviewer: You can link to the other sections in the RFC. Checkout this example [here](https://github.com/rfcs/crypto-conditions/blame/master/src/spec/crypto-conditions.md#L295).

Basically, you take the heading title (e.g., `PayID Easy Checkout Protocol`) and then transpose it to a hyphenated+lower-case style (e.g., `payid-easy-checkout-protocol`) and then put them together in a link, like this:

```
See [this section here](#payid-easy-checkout-protocol).
```

One thing to be careful of is if you change the title of a heading but forget to updates other links in the document.

Author: Sweet. I was going to wait until we finalized everything to manually add sections, but this is better

PayID Easy Checkout URL using Web Redirects, supplemental RFCs are needed to define the different ways in which a PayID
client can utilize a PayID Easy Checkout URL. 

# PayID Easy Checkout Protocol
The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol can be used to facilitate an end-to-end checkout flow between a recipient client, such

> as an online merchant UI, and a wallet client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as an online merchant UI, and a sending client, such as a wallet.
```

The protocol is comprised of two parts:

1. PayID Easy Checkout Discovery

> 2. Assembly of PayID Easy Checkout URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. PayID Easy Checkout URL Assembly
```

> The result of the protocol is a URL, which can be used by clients to complete a payment with minimal user interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of the protocol is a URL, which can be used by sending clients to complete a payment.
```

> However, the PayID Easy Checkout protocol does not define how a PayID Easy Checkout URL can or should be used. Instead,

Reviewer: I would strike this sentence - you said about this already on [line 96](https://github.com/nkramer44/rfcs/pull/1/files#diff-25a9deb2759d29ddf70936b0fb54cae7R96).

we defer those specifications to future RFCs. 

## PayID Easy Checkout Discovery
PayID Easy Checkout extends [PAYID-DISCOVERY][] by defining a new link in the PayID metadata JRD
returned by a PayID Discovery query. This link, defined in section (TODO: link to jrd section) 

> of this specification, includes the PayID Easy Checkout URI Template representing a resource on the wallet which can

Reviewer: TODO: Reword for template removal (e.g., link will probably not be a template but will be a URL).

be used to complete a payment.

> E-commerce receivers who wish to perform Easy Checkout MUST query the PayID Discovery server to obtain a PayID Easy Checkout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E-commerce merchants who wish to initiate an Easy Checkout flow MUST query the sender's PayID Discovery server to obtain a PayID Easy Checkout
```

URI Template. Digital wallets and PayID server operators who wish to enable PayID Easy Checkout MUST include a JRD Link
conforming to the definition in section (TODO: link to jrd section) of this paper in all PayID Easy Checkout Discovery 
responses.

> E-commerce receivers SHOULD implement fallback measures to complete checkout if a user's wallet does not support PayID Easy Checkout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E-commerce merchants SHOULD implement fallback measures to complete a checkout flow if a user's wallet does not support PayID Easy Checkout.
```

> E-commerce receivers SHOULD implement fallback measures to complete checkout if a user's wallet does not support PayID Easy Checkout.

Reviewer: Should this be less specific than e-commerce? E.g., what about donations or other use-cases?

Author: I'm not sure what the correct wording would be.  To me, e-commerce means anything related to sending money to someone online, which would include donations, but maybe that's wrong.

The following steps describe how a PayID client can query a PayID server to obtain a PayID Easy Checkout URI Template. 

### Step 1: Assemble PayID Easy Checkout Discovery URL
The process of assembling a PayID Discovery URL is defined in section 4.1.1 of [PAYID-DISCOVERY][], and is
the same as for PayID Easy Checkout Discovery.

### Step 2: Query PayID Discovery URL

> A Webfinger query MUST be performed against the PayID Discovery URL assembled in the previous section,

Reviewer: Can the contents of this step be replaced by a reference to section [4.1.2 of PAYID-DISCOVERY](https://github.com/payid-org/rfcs/blob/master/dist/spec/payid-discovery.txt#L406)?

Author: Originally I did, but the wording is slightly different for PayID Discovery vs PayID Easy Checkout.  It was a short enough section that I felt a reference would be overkill

as the resource representation to convey information about the requested
PayID.

If the Webfinger endpoint returns a non-200 HTTP response status code, then PayID Easy Checkout is considered to 
have failed. Clients SHOULD implement fallback measures to complete checkout in this case.

### Step 3: Parse PayID Easy Checkout Metadata
If a wallet supports PayID Easy Checkout, the PayID server MUST respond with a HTTP status code 200 and a JSON payload
containing a JSON Resource Descriptor (JRD) as defined in section (TODO: link to jrd section) of this document. 
The JRD MUST contain a link conforming to the link definition in section (TODO: link to section) of this paper.

For example, a PayID server might respond to a PayID Easy Checkout Discovery query with the following payload:

     {
        "subject": "payid:alice$wallet.com",
        "links": [
            {
                "rel" : "https://payid.org/ns/payid-easy-checkout/1.0",
                "template": "https://wallet.com/checkout?amount={amount}&receiverPayId={receiverPayId}&currency={currency}&nextUrl={nextUrl}"
            }
        ]
     }
     

> The receiver client must parse this response to find the PayID Easy Checkout Link. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The receiver PayID Discovery client must parse this response to find the PayID Easy Checkout Link. 
```

If the JRD returned from the PayID Easy Checkout Discovery query does not contain a 
PayID Easy Checkout Link in its 'links' collection, PayID Easy Checkout is considered to have failed.
Once a PayID Easy Checkout URI Template has been obtained from the PayID Easy Checkout Link by the PayID client, 
PayID Easy Checkout Discovery is considered to be complete. 

### Template Syntax
This specification defines a simple template syntax for PayID Easy Checkout URI Template
transformation.  A template is a string containing brace-enclosed
("{}") variable names marking the parts of the string that are to be
substituted by the corresponding variable values.

This specification defines several variables, which MAY or MAY NOT be present in every PayID Easy Checkout URI Template.
These variables are as follows:
    
    'amount': The amount that should be sent by the sender to the receiver
    'receiverPayID': The PayID URI of the receiver

>     'currency': The ISO-4217 currency code that the sender should send

Reviewer: My instinct is to call this `assetCode` instead because of our learnings from ILP -- it's possible that "payments" may not be made in a "currency" per-se (e.g., what if I want to pay in stock?).

In general, this is maybe an edge-case though, so happy to hear pushback.

Author: Yeah I'm cool with that.  I doubt anyone will be using Easy Checkout to send stocks, but at least things will be consistent with the rest of our codebase

Additionally, if a hijacker gained access to the merchant client, they could replace the PayID Easy Checkout URI Template 
for the purposes of a phishing attack.

Current work on the PayID Protocol and its extensions may prove useful in mitigating these risks. 

## Access Control
As with all web resources, access to the PayID Discovery resource could
require authentication. See section 6 of [RFC7033][] for Access Control
considerations.

Furthermore, it is RECOMMENDED that PayID servers only expose PayID Easy Checkout URI Templates
which resolve to a protected resource.  

# IANA Considerations
  ## New Link Relation Types
  This document defines the following Link relation type per [RFC7033][].
  See section 3 for examples of each type of Link.
  
  ### PayID Discovery URI Template
  
    * Relation Type ('rel'): `https://payid.org/ns/payid-easy-checkout-uri/1.0`
    * Media Type: `application/jrd+json`
    * Description: PayID Discovery URI Template, version 1.0

# Acknowledgments

# Appendix

## Motivation
The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol aims to enable a consistent user experience for customers paying for goods

> in an e-commerce by standardizing the interaction between merchants and customer wallets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or services by standardizing the interaction between merchants/non-profits and customer/donor wallets.
```

Given the ability to assign arbitrary metadata to a PayID as defined in [PayID-Discovery][], there is an opportunity

> to standardize the set of interactions between merchant and customer, specifically the process by which a merchant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to standardize the set of interactions between payor and payee, specifically the process by which a payee
```

> directs a customer to their digital wallet to complete a payment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directs a payor to their digital wallet to complete a payment.
```

We believe this protocol will enable an improved paying experience by reducing the number

> of steps a customer must take to complete a transaction and creating a consistent and familiar checkout pattern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of steps a payor must take to complete a transaction.
```

> for customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> The second priority of PayID Easy Checkout is to limit the engineering effort needed to implement the protocol. 

Reviewer: I don't see mention of a "first" priority."

Author: woops, I think I deleted a section

Clients wishing to adopt this pattern should only need to implement UI-level changes in order to make the flow function 
as intended, which may aid in expanding overall adoption, further enhancing the protocol's user experience benefits. 

### Design Goals

#### Minimal effort for the customer

> In order for a customer to checkout using the PayID Easy Checkout protocol, the customer only needs to provide a merchant

Reviewer: Payor instead of customer?

with their PayID Easy Checkout enabled PayID.

> #### No server-side software not already covered by the PayID Protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### No New Server-Side Software
```

Because the flow of PayID Easy Checkout is predicated on using the PayID Discovery Protocol and then redirecting the 

> customer away from the merchant, all of the flow can be instrumented on the front end and doesn't require server-side resources. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
customer away from the merchant, all of the flow can be instrumented on the front end and doesn't require new server-side resources. 
```

> Apart from a PayID Discovery compliant PayID Server, The PayID Easy Checkout Protocol does not require server-side 

Reviewer: This seems duplicative of the previous paragraph.

software to be run by either the customer or merchant for a payment. The PayID server is capable of providing details 
of where to send the customer via the PayID Discovery Protocol. Assuming the wallet used by the customer has implemented 
support in their UI for the PayID Easy Checkout Protocol, the customer can be redirected to their wallet 
to complete their transaction.

## Example Usage
This section shows a non-normative example of PayID Easy Checkout between a hypothetical merchant and customer. The merchant
accepts payments using the PayID pay$merchant.com, and the customer controls the PayID alice$wallet.com.

### PayID Easy Checkout Initiation

> In this example, the customer might place some items in an online shopping cart on the merchant's UI, then choose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the customer might place some items in an online shopping cart on the merchant's web-site, then choose
```

> to checkout.  The merchant UI would then render a form asking for the customer's PayID, as well as a "Checkout with PayID"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to checkout.  The merchant would then render a form asking for the customer's PayID, as well as a "Checkout with PayID"
```

> button.  Once the customer inputs their PayID alice$wallet.com and clicks the "Checkout with PayID" button, the merchant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
button.  Once the customer inputs their PayID `alice$wallet.com` and clicks the "Checkout with PayID" button, the merchant
```

> UI begins the PayID Easy Checkout flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
begins the PayID Easy Checkout flow.
```

allows the merchant to supply a redirect or callback URL for the sender's wallet to call once the customer has confirmed
the payment. In this example, the merchant would like to display a "Thank You" page, and replaces `{nextUrl}` 
with `https://merchant.com/thankyou`.

### Redirect Customer to Their Wallet
Once the merchant UI populates the required query parameters in the URL template, the merchant UI redirects the customer to 
the Redirect URL so that the customer can confirm the payment.

### Customer Confirms Payment
After the customer clicks the "Pay with PayID" button the merchant's UI, and the merchant performs the previous steps,
the customer will be redirected to the Redirect URL, which is a front end resource of the wallet. The wallet UI can
read the query parameters from the Redirect URL and render a confirmation page or modal with all of the required fields
pre-populated.

Once the customer confirms the payment, the wallet would perform a PayID address lookup on the "receiverPayId" query
parameter to get the payment address of the merchant and submit a transaction to the underlying ledger or payment system.

> The merchant can then redirect the user back to the URL specified in the "nextUrl" query parameter, which will display

Reviewer: TODO: New section about the transaction Id correlation in the payID itself (e.g., a merchant can generate a custom PayID like `pay-12345$example.com` where `12345` is the `transactionId`. This unique PayID will translate into a transaction-aware layer1 address that the merchant (or its processor) can use to correlate the payment on the merchant's backend once a payment comes into that address.

            }
        ]
     }
     
The receiver client must parse this response to find the PayID Easy Checkout Link. 
If the JRD returned from the PayID Easy Checkout Discovery query does not contain a 
PayID Easy Checkout Link in its 'links' collection, PayID Easy Checkout is considered to have failed.
Once a PayID Easy Checkout URI Template has been obtained from the PayID Easy Checkout Link by the PayID client, 
PayID Easy Checkout Discovery is considered to be complete. 

### Template Syntax
This specification defines a simple template syntax for PayID Easy Checkout URI Template
transformation.  A template is a string containing brace-enclosed
("{}") variable names marking the parts of the string that are to be
substituted by the corresponding variable values.

This specification defines several variables, which MAY or MAY NOT be present in every PayID Easy Checkout URI Template.
These variables are as follows:
    
    'amount': The amount that should be sent by the sender to the receiver
    'receiverPayID': The PayID URI of the receiver
    'currency': The ISO-4217 currency code that the sender should send

>     'network': The network that the sender should send payment over (TODO: define network enum or use rfc)

Author: Is there an existing standard we can use for payment network names? What is the best way to define that standard if it doesn't exist already?

Reviewer: See base PAYID spec - there are a few standard, with other possibly coming once they gain broader adoption.  There will be other `network` values that may not be standardized, so I think it's preferable to keep this defined as a pointer to whatever base PayID defines this as.

respectively, MUST be percent or otherwise encoded.

Protocols MAY define additional variables and syntax rules, but MUST NOT
change the meaning of the variables specified in this document. If a client is unable to
successfully process a template (e.g., unknown variable names, unknown or
incompatible syntax), the link SHOULD be ignored.

The template syntax ABNF is as follows:

    uri-char     =  ( reserved / unreserved / pct-encoded )
    var-char     =  ALPHA / DIGIT / "." / "_"
    var-name     =  %x61.63.63.74.70.61.72.74 / ( 1*var-char )
    variable     =  "{" var-name "}"
    PAYID-EASY-CHECKOUT-URI-Template =  *( uri-char / variable )

For example:

    Input:    alice$wallet.com
              amount = 10
              receiverPayID=pay$merchant.com
              currency=XRP
              network=XRPL
              nextUrl=https://merchant.com/thankyou
    Template: https://wallet.com/checkout?amount={amount}&receiverPayId={receiverPayID}&currency={currency}&network={network}&nextUrl={nextURL}
    Output:   https://wallet.com/checkout?amount=10&receiverPayId=payid%2Apay%24merchant.com&currency=XRP&network=XRPL&nextUrl=https://merchant.com/thankyou

> TODO: Should we define acceptable URL template variable values for the redirect?

Author: Open question here.  I believe in the charity demo we redirect back to the charity site from the wallet with some populated data.  I could imagine a merchant wanting to get back a transaction id or payment status or something.  If so, we would need to spec out a URI template format for the `nextUrl` field in the PayID Easy Checkout URI Template.

My thinking here though is that this is probably not needed for now.  Merchants/payment processors can likely just show a generic confirmation page (maybe with an invoiceId or something, which can be put in `nextUrl`), and that they won't need any information about the payment in the redirect URL, because they will already have systems in place to correlate payments and monitor ledgers.

Thoughts on this?

Reviewer: Per our conversation, no spec needed, but we'll add an example in section 8 that includes a `transactionId` in the PayID (e.g., `pay-123456789$example.com`).

The PayID Easy Checkout URL SHOULD be parsed to retrieve the values set by the recipient client. It is RECOMMENDED
that wallet UIs use these values to pre-populate a payment transaction.

# PayID Easy Checkout JRDs
 This section defines the PayID Easy Checkout Link, which conforms to section 4.4 of the
 Webfinger RFC.  In order for a PayID server to enable PayID Easy Checkout, a PayID Discovery query to the server
 MUST return a JRD containing a PayID Easy Checkout Link.
 
 The Link MUST include the Link Relation Type of section (TODO: link to link type section) in the object's 'rel' field.
 The Link MUST also include a PayID Easy Checkout URI Template in the 'template' field of the link.
 
    * 'rel': `https://payid.org/ns/payid-easy-checkout-uri/1.0`
    * 'template': A PayID Easy Checkout URI Template
    
 The following is an example of a PayID Easy Checkout Link that indicates a PayID Easy Checkout URI Template:
 
    {
        "rel": "https://payid.org/ns/payid-easy-checkout-uri/1.0",
        "template": https://wallet.com/checkout?amount={amount}&receiverPayId={receiverPayID}&currency={currency}&network={network}&nextUrl={nextURL}
    }

> # Security Considerations

Author: @aanchal4 I wrote down some initial security thoughts, but could use your expertise here if you're available
